README.md, before:

![QA Portfolio](https://img.shields.io/badge/QA%20Portfolio-Playwright-blue)

# QA Automation Portfolio: SauceDemo Login

This repository demonstrates automated testing of the [SauceDemo web app](https://www.saucedemo.com) login workflow using Playwright. It highlights test planning, automated test implementation, and result verification.

## Goals
- Showcase automation skills using Playwright (JavaScript)
- Validate login workflows including valid, invalid, and empty credentials
- Demonstrate test design, execution, and reporting
- Implement Page Object Model (POM) for maintainable test code
- Tag tests with @smoke and @regression for selective execution

## Tools & Technologies
- Playwright Test Runner (`@playwright/test`)
- Node.js / npm
- JavaScript
- Git for version control
- Chrome, Firefox, and WebKit browsers (via Playwright)

## Project Structure
```
playwright-login-portfolio/
├─ tests/ # Playwright test scripts
│ ├─ login.spec.js
│ ├─ cart.spec.js 
├─ pages/ # Page Object Models
│ └─ LoginPage.js
├─ utils/ # Helper functions
│ └─ helpers.js
├─ test-results/ # Generated test reports (after running tests)
├─ package.json # Project dependencies and scripts
├─ package-lock.json
└─ README.md
```

## Test Scenarios
| Scenario | Description | Tag |
|----------|-------------|-----|
| Valid Login | User can log in with valid credentials | @smoke @regression |
| Invalid Username | Displays proper error message for invalid username | @regression |
| Invalid Password | Displays proper error message for invalid password | @regression |
| Empty Username/Password | Displays required field errors | @regression |
| Locked-Out User | Displays account locked error | @regression |
| Cart: Add Single Item | Adds a single product to cart | @smoke @regression |
| Cart: Reset App State | Resets Add to Cart buttons | @regression |
| Cart: Add Multiple Items | Adds multiple products to cart | @regression |
| Cart: Cart Persistence | Cart retains items after page reload | @regression |
| Cart: Remove Items | Removes items from cart | @regression |

## How to Use
1. Clone the repository:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/zjtheilen/playwright-login-portfolio.git
cd playwright-login-portfolio
```

2. Install dependencies
```bash
npm install
```

3. Install browsers
```bash
npx playwright install
```

4. Run tests
```bash
npx playwright test # run all tests
npx playwright test --grep @smoke # run smoke tests (only critical tests)
npx playwright test --grep-invert @smoke  # run everything except smoke
```

5. View test results
```bash
npx playwright show-report # view HTML report
```

## Test Execution Summary
| Area Tested | Test Cases | Passed | Failed | Notes |
|-------------|------------|--------|--------|-------|
| Login | 6 | 6 | 0 | All login scenarios covered |
| Cart | 6 | 5 | 1 | Bug on Reset App State captured |
| Total | 12 | 11 | 1 | Failures are intentional (demo site does not reset cart state correctly) |

**Failed Test: Reset App State resets Add to Cart Buttons**
- **Locator:** `button[data-test="remove-sauce-labs-bike-light"]`
- **Expected:** not visible
- **Received:** visible
- **Code Snippet:**
```javascript
    const addButton = page.locator('button[data-test="add-to-cart-sauce-labs-bike-light"]');
    const removeButton = page.locator('button[data-test="remove-sauce-labs-bike-light"]');

    await expect(removeButton).not.toBeVisible();
    await expect(addButton).toBeVisible();
```

## Investigating Failing Tests
When a test fails in Playwright, artifacts are automatically generated when you have `screenshot`, `video`, or `trace` enabled in `playwright.config.js`.

1. **Screenshots**
- Captured automatically when a test fails (requires `screenshot: "only-on-failure"` in `playwright.config.js`)
- Example file path:
```bash
test-results\cart-Cart-functionality-Re-638dd--to-Cart-Buttons-regression\test-failed-1.png
```
- Open with any image viewer to see the page state at failure.

2. **Videos**
- Capture the entire test execution when enabled (`video: "on"` or `"retain-on-failure"`)
- Example file path:
```bash
test-results\cart-Cart-functionality-Re-638dd--to-Cart-Buttons-regression\video.webm
```
- Open in a browser or media player to see step-by-step test execution.

3. **Traces**
- Provide a detailed timeline of the test: DOM snapshots, network requests, console logs, and actions.
- Example file path:
```bash
test-results\cart-Cart-functionality-Re-638dd--to-Cart-Buttons-regression\trace.zip
```
- To inpsect:
```bash
npx playwright show-trace test-results/cart-Cart-functionality-Re-638dd--to-Cart-Buttons-regression/trace.zip
```
- Playwright UI allows you to:
    - Step through each action
    - View screenshots at each step
    - Inspect network requests and console logs
    - Debug timing or flaky issues interactively

## Highlights
- Implemented E2E test automation with Playwright
- Refactored login tests to use Page Object Model (POM)
- Tagged tests with @smoke and @regression for selective runs
- Created reusable helper functions for login and cart actions
- Captured and documented a real bug in a demo website
- Used cross-browser testing (Chrome, Firefox, WebKit)

Commit message:

open testing up to firefox but keep webkit out as it is macOS and this environment is in Windows. add badge to top of README, replace failed test blurb on README to a known failing test blurb.

README.md, after:

![Playwright Tests](https://github.com/zjtheilen/playwright-login-portfolio/actions/workflows/playwright.yml/badge.svg)


# QA Automation Portfolio: SauceDemo Login

This repository demonstrates automated testing of the [SauceDemo web app](https://www.saucedemo.com) login workflow using Playwright. It highlights test planning, automated test implementation, and result verification.

## Goals
- Showcase automation skills using Playwright (JavaScript)
- Validate login workflows including valid, invalid, and empty credentials
- Demonstrate test design, execution, and reporting
- Implement Page Object Model (POM) for maintainable test code
- Tag tests with @smoke and @regression for selective execution

## Tools & Technologies
- Playwright Test Runner (`@playwright/test`)
- Node.js / npm
- JavaScript
- Git for version control
- Chrome, Firefox, and WebKit browsers (via Playwright)

## Project Structure
```
playwright-login-portfolio/
├─ tests/ # Playwright test scripts
│ ├─ login.spec.js
│ ├─ cart.spec.js 
├─ pages/ # Page Object Models
│ └─ LoginPage.js
├─ utils/ # Helper functions
│ └─ helpers.js
├─ test-results/ # Generated test reports (after running tests)
├─ package.json # Project dependencies and scripts
├─ package-lock.json
└─ README.md
```

## Test Scenarios
| Scenario | Description | Tag |
|----------|-------------|-----|
| Valid Login | User can log in with valid credentials | @smoke @regression |
| Invalid Username | Displays proper error message for invalid username | @regression |
| Invalid Password | Displays proper error message for invalid password | @regression |
| Empty Username/Password | Displays required field errors | @regression |
| Locked-Out User | Displays account locked error | @regression |
| Cart: Add Single Item | Adds a single product to cart | @smoke @regression |
| Cart: Reset App State | Resets Add to Cart buttons | @regression |
| Cart: Add Multiple Items | Adds multiple products to cart | @regression |
| Cart: Cart Persistence | Cart retains items after page reload | @regression |
| Cart: Remove Items | Removes items from cart | @regression |

## How to Use
1. Clone the repository:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/zjtheilen/playwright-login-portfolio.git
cd playwright-login-portfolio
```

2. Install dependencies
```bash
npm install
```

3. Install browsers
```bash
npx playwright install
```

4. Run tests
```bash
npx playwright test # run all tests
npx playwright test --grep @smoke # run smoke tests (only critical tests)
npx playwright test --grep-invert @smoke  # run everything except smoke
```

5. View test results
```bash
npx playwright show-report # view HTML report
```

## Test Execution Summary
| Area Tested | Test Cases | Passed | Failed | Notes |
|-------------|------------|--------|--------|-------|
| Login | 6 | 6 | 0 | All login scenarios covered |
| Cart | 6 | 5 | 1 | Bug on Reset App State captured |
| Total | 12 | 11 | 1 | Failures are intentional (demo site does not reset cart state correctly) |

## Known Failing Test (Intentional)
The following test is expected to fail and is intentionally kept active:

**Reset App State resets Add to Cart Buttons** (`@regression`)

**Observed Behavior**
- After using "Reset App State", the product remains in a "Remove" state
- The "Add to Cart" button does not reappear as expected

**Expected Behavior**
- All items should reset to an unselected state
- "Add to Cart" buttons should be visible

**Why this test is not skipped**
- Skipping would hide a known defect
- Keeping it active documents real application behavior
- Ensures the issue remains visible if behavior changes

**Debugging Artifacts**
- Screenshot: captured at failure
- Video: full test execution
- Trace: step-by-step replay with DOM snapshots

These artifacts can be reviewed via the Playwright HTML report.


## Investigating Failing Tests
When a test fails in Playwright, artifacts are automatically generated when you have `screenshot`, `video`, or `trace` enabled in `playwright.config.js`.

1. **Screenshots**
- Captured automatically when a test fails (requires `screenshot: "only-on-failure"` in `playwright.config.js`)
- Example file path:
```bash
test-results\cart-Cart-functionality-Re-638dd--to-Cart-Buttons-regression\test-failed-1.png
```
- Open with any image viewer to see the page state at failure.

2. **Videos**
- Capture the entire test execution when enabled (`video: "on"` or `"retain-on-failure"`)
- Example file path:
```bash
test-results\cart-Cart-functionality-Re-638dd--to-Cart-Buttons-regression\video.webm
```
- Open in a browser or media player to see step-by-step test execution.

3. **Traces**
- Provide a detailed timeline of the test: DOM snapshots, network requests, console logs, and actions.
- Example file path:
```bash
test-results\cart-Cart-functionality-Re-638dd--to-Cart-Buttons-regression\trace.zip
```
- To inpsect:
```bash
npx playwright show-trace test-results/cart-Cart-functionality-Re-638dd--to-Cart-Buttons-regression/trace.zip
```
- Playwright UI allows you to:
    - Step through each action
    - View screenshots at each step
    - Inspect network requests and console logs
    - Debug timing or flaky issues interactively

## Highlights
- Implemented E2E test automation with Playwright
- Refactored login tests to use Page Object Model (POM)
- Tagged tests with @smoke and @regression for selective runs
- Created reusable helper functions for login and cart actions
- Captured and documented a real bug in a demo website
- Used cross-browser testing (Chrome, Firefox, WebKit)
